@node about,tooling,documentation index,Top
@include version.texi
@chapter Cedille's Type Theory

Cedille's type theory is called the Calculus of Dependent Lambda
Eliminations (CDLE).  It is somewhat rare in being a Curry-style type
theory.  Coq and Agda are based on Church-style theories.  The
difference is that in a Curry-style (aka extrinsic) type theory, type
annotations are merely hints to the type checker, and the ``real''
terms (the subjects of metatheoretic analysis, for example) are
completely unannotated.  Thus, such annotations can be erased during
compilation and during formal reasoning; in particular during
conversion checking, where the type checker tests whether two terms
are definitionally equal.  In contrast, with Church-style (aka
intrinsic) type theory, the annotations are ``really there'', and must
be preserved during compilation and conversion.

For an example, consider the polymorphic identity function Λ X : ★ . λ
x : X . x.  In Church-style type theory, the binder introducting the
type variable X and the annotation giving the classifier for x are
truly part of the term, and the theory itself does not allow for them
to be erased.  In contrast, in a Curry-style type theory like CDLE,
those annotations are just hints to help the type checker see how to
assign the type ∀ X : ★ . X ➔ X to λ x . x.  The type theory has a
notion of erasure, and conversion compares the erasures of terms
rather than the annotated terms.

@section Cedille extends the Calculus of Constructions

The starting point for Cedille is a Curry-style version of the
Calculus of Constructions (CC).  Coq is based on several extensions of
CC, notably with a predicative universe hierarchy (Luo's Extended
Calculus of Constructions), and with a primitive system of inductive
datatypes (the Calculus of Inductive Constructions of Paulin-Mohring
and Werner).  Cedille has neither the universe hierarchy nor the
inductive types.  The universe hierarchy is omitted to avoid
additional metatheoretic and implementation complexity, which has not
been justified to my (Aaron's) satisfaction by examples.  So it is
omitted not for any really fundamental reason (that we know of).
Omitting the system of primitive inductive types, however, is one of
the chief goals of Cedille, and will be discussed more below.

The language is divided into three layers: terms, types, and kinds.  Terms
are the programs we intend eventually to execute, or to use as proofs.
Types describe programs, and under the Curry-Howard isomorphism which
Cedille makes use of, can be seen as formulas to be proved.  Kinds are the
classifiers for types.  So in Cedille we have

term : type : kind

@section The type constructs of Cedille

From CC, Cedille inherits the following type constructs:

@itemize
@item ∀ X : 𝒌 . T -- this is impredicative quantification over types X of kind 𝒌.
@item Π x : T . T' -- this is dependent function space, where the return type T' may mention the input argument x.
@item λ X : 𝒌 . T -- this is a type-level function over types X of kind 𝒌.
@item λ x : T . T' -- this is a type-level function over terms x of type T.
@item T t -- this is applying a type-level function T to a term t.
@item T · T' -- this is applying a type-level function T to a type T' (note the required center dot).
@item X -- type variables are types, of course.
@end itemize

See @ref{unicode shortcuts} for how to type these symbols in Cedille mode.

To the above constructs, Cedille adds the following, discussed more below:

@itemize
@item ι x : T . T' -- dependent intersection of T and T', where T' may contain x.
@item @{ t ≃ t' @} -- untyped equality between terms t and t'.
@item ∀ x : T . T' -- the dependent type for functions taking in an erased argument x of type T (aka implicit product)
@end itemize

@subsection Dependent intersections

In (Curry-style) type theory, an intersection type T ∩ T' can be
assigned to a term t iff both T and T' separately can be assigned to
t.  Dependent intersection types, introduced by Kopylov in
@uref{https://doi.org/10.1109/LICS.2003.1210048, this paper}, extend
this idea to allow the type T' to reference the term t (i.e., the
subject of typing) via a bound variable x.  Kopylov's notation for
this is x : T ∩ T'.  Cedille uses the notation ι x : T . T' for the
same concept.

One very helpful way to think of these types is that they allow the
type T' of t to refer to t itself, but through a weaker view; namely,
the type T.  So if you are writing some function f, say, the type T'
you give for f can mention f itself -- which seems insane (as in
insane dependent typing) -- but sanity is preserved by the fact that
T' is only allowed to reference f through some other type T.

In Cedille, dependent intersections are used to derive inductive
datatypes, using a critical observation of Leivant's from
@uref{https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1983.50, this paper}.  Suppose
one is trying to prove the natural-number induction principle for
a specific number N; that is, for any predicate P on natural
numbers, if the base and steps cases hold, then P holds for N.
What would the proof look like for this?  One would assume predicate P,
assume P 0 (base case) and ∀ n : Nat . P n ➔ P (S n) (step case), and prove P N by apply the
step case N times to the base case.  Leivant's remarkable observation is that
this proof, seen through the lens of the Curry-Howard isomorphism, is

Λ P . λ z . λ s . s (... (s z))

where s is applied N times.  This erases exactly to the Church-encoding of N.
This means that using the Church-encoding we can view a number N two ways:
as an iterator of type ∀ X : ★ . X ➔ (X ➔ X) ➔ X -- call this type cNat -- and as a proof of its own
induction principle, which we can see as some kind of dependent enrichment
of the first type:

∀ P : cNat ➔ ★ . P 0 ➔ (∀ n : cNat . P n ➔ P (S n)) ➔ P N

Calling this second type, as a predicate on N, Inductive, the crucial role
of dependent intersection types is to allow us to define Nat as

ι N : cNat. Inductive N

This definition seems to allow one to prove universality of predicates on cNats -- not Nats!
But universality of Nat-predicates turns out to follow from this, in several different ways.  
See language-overview/induction-for-church-nats.ced for one example.

@subsection Primitive equality between untyped terms

The type @{ t ≃ t' @} is a primitive equality type, between untyped
terms.  The meaning of such a type is that t and t' are beta-eta equal
(where any necessary instantiations of variables bound outside the
equation are applied to t and t').  Cedille provides a primitive
operation to rewrite with such equalities (namely ρ), and to prove them when the
sides of the equation can be seen themselves to be beta-eta equal
(without instantiating variables bound outside the equation); this is β.

In more detail: whenever t and t' are beta-eta equal, the
type-assignment system of CDLE considers any term to inhabit type @{ t
≃ t' @}.  In Cedille, β is an annotated term inhabiting that type; β
itself erases to λ x . x.  If one wishes to pick a different
unannotated term t1 to inhabit an obviously true equation like this,
then one writes β@{t1@}.  We call this the Kleene trick, after Stephen
Cole Kleene's similar approach to realizing true equations by any
number whatsoever.  Here, any term proves an obviously true equation.
This has the intriguing side effect of giving Cedille a type for all
terms, even ones otherwise untypable.  Thus Cedille is
Turing-complete: any closed term can be assigned type @{ λ x . x ≃ λ x
. x @}.  In principle type checking becomes undecidable at this point,
because checking whether two terms of pure untyped lambda calculus are
beta-eta equal is undecidable.  In practice, however, we think of the
type checker as having some bound on the number of steps of
beta-eta-normalization it will perform on the sides before testing for
alpha-equivalence.  This bound is currently up to the user to enforce
by terminating the tool if it is taking too long.

Rewriting is performed by a construct ρ t - t'.  Here, t should prove
an equation @{ t1 ≃ t2 @}.  Then the type synthesized from or used to
check t' will be rewritten to replace any subterm beta-eta equal to t1
with t2.  If we are typing the ρ-term in synthesizing mode, then we
rewrite the type of t' by replacing all subterms convertible with t2
with t1 (so we rewrite right to left).  If we are typing the ρ-term
in checking mode, then we rewrite the incoming (contextual) type
to replace all subterms convertible with t1 with t2 (so we rewrite left
to right).

See language-overview/equational-reasoning.ced for examples.

@subsection Implicit products

For unannotated terms, the type ∀ x : T . T' (which can be written T ➾
T' when x does not occur free in T') introduces x of type T into the
typing context, but otherwise does not affect the subject of typing. So
such an x is purely specificational, and cannot appear in the
unannotated term. In annotated terms, we use the construct Λ x : T . t
to introduce this x, which may appear in annotations (only). An example
is specifying the length of a vector as an erased argument to a function
like map on vectors. In this case, the function does not need to use the
length of the vector to compute the result. The length is only used
specificationally, to state that the lengths of the input and output
vectors are the same.

If one has a term t of type ∀ x : T . T' and wishes to instantiate x
with some term t', the notation in Cedille is t -t'.

Finally, one sometimes wishes to give a binding for a more complex
specificational term for use within an expression. To facilitate this
Cedille has notation for erased let-bindings @{x : T = t@} - t2, where
x is the bound variable, t1 its definition, and t2 and expression where
x is in scope. The syntax for ordinary let-bindings is [x : T = t1] - t2

@subsection Datatype notations

As already mentioned, the above constructs of Cedille are sufficient
to derive induction for a class of datatypes, including parametrized
and indexed ones, that are useful for programming and proving in
practice.  Starting with Cedille 1.1, we have added direct support for
datatype notations.  One can declare datatypes using syntax similar to
that of languages like Coq or Agda, and define functions using pattern
matching and pattern-matching recursion.  Unlike Coq and Agda (as
implemented at the time of writing), though, Cedille's datatype
notations elaborate to Cedille Core (see @xref{tooling}), which does
not have any built-in notion of datatypes, only the pure type theory
of CDLE.  One additional difference from the datatype notations of Coq
and Agda is that Cedille's pattern-matching recursion supports
histomorphic recursion, where one can iteratively extract subdata from
a pattern variable and then make a recursive call (on the extracted
subdata).  This subsumes nested pattern-matching, although we do not
at present support nested-pattern syntax (we are considering possibly
adding this in a subsequent release).  For examples of the basics of
datatypes in Cedille, see @code{language-overview/datatypes.ced}, and
for an example of histomorphic recursion see @code{language-overview/cov-pattern-matching.ced}.


@section More reading 

The syntax and semantics of Cedille are described in this document
@uref{https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04709, on arXiv}.  You can also
find this in the docs/semantics subdirectory of this distribution.

The paper first showing how to derive induction for an inductive type
in Cedille is @uref{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apal.2018.03.002, here}.

