@node cedille mode commands,unicode shortcuts,Index,Top

@chapter cedille-mode commands

Cedille mode supports the following commands:

@chapter Navigation
@table @command
@item f/F
Navigate to the next same-level node in the parse tree

@item b/B
Navigate to the previous same-level node in the parse tree

@item p
Navigate to the parent of the current node in the parse tree

@item n
Navigate to the previously visited child (first by default) node of the current node in the parse tree

@item a/e
Navigate to the first/last node in the current level of the parse tree

@item r/R
Select next/previous error

@item t/T
Select first/last error in file

@item j
Jump to location associated with selected node

@item g
Clear current selection

@item ,/.
Navigate to the previous/next page in browsing history

@item </>
Navigate to the first/last page in browsing history
@end table

@chapter Information
@table @command
@item i/I
Toggle info mode (provides information about the currently selected node)

@item c/C
Toggle context mode (provides information about the context of the currently selected term)

@item s/S
Toggle summary mode (provides information about the contents of the entire file)

@item x/X
Toggle scratch mode

@item h
Open information documents describing how to use Cedille mode

@item 1
Close all emacs windows except the current one; convenience keystroke for emacs command delete-other-windows.

@item m
Highlight/unhighlight all instances of the selected symbol (context-sensitive)
@end table

@chapter Interactive
If associated with a span (and the beginning and end characters of the span were not deleted), each of these commands will be re-called each time you enter into Cedille mode. They all begin with the 'C-i' prefix.

@table @command
@item C-i n
Show normalization of selected span. If no span is selected, this will prompt an expression to normalize.

@item C-i h
Like 'C-i n', but shows head-normalization

@item C-i e
Show erasure of selected span. If no span is selected, this will prompt an expression to erase.

@item C-i r
Remove all interactive attributes associated with the selected span

@item C-i R
Remove all interactive attributes

@item C-i b
Open the beta-reduction buffer with an input expression. Copies global scope and local scope if a span is selected.

@item C-i B
Open the beta-reduction buffer with the selected span

@item C-i t
Open the beta-reduction buffer with the selected span's expected type (or type if there is no expected type)

@end table

@chapter Other
@table @command
@item M-x
Copy the selected span to the scratch buffer

@item C-h <int>
Alters highlighting scheme depending on value of <int>:
1: default highlighting
2: language level highlighting
3: checking mode highlighting

@item q/M-s/C-g
Quit Cedille mode

@item K
Kill the Cedille process and restart it if it is taking an unusually long time

@item $
Open customization window for configuring Cedille mode

@end table
